delay biases slides (#104)
nfidd/nfidd: sessions/slides/introduction-to-biases-in-epidemiological-delays.qmd

---
title: "Introduction to biases in epidemiological delays"
author: "Nowcasting and forecasting of infectious disease dynamics"
engine: knitr
format:
  revealjs:
    output: slides/introduction-to-biases-in-epidemiological-delays.html
    footer: "Introduction to biases in epidemiological delays"
---

```{r seed}
set.seed(123)
```
# Biases in epidemiological delays

Why might our estimates of epidemiological delays be biased?

. . .

::: {.fragment .fade-out}
- data reliability and representativeness
:::
- intrinsic issues with data collection and recording

## Issue #1: Double censoring

- reporting of events usually as a **date** (not date + precise time)
- for short delays this can make quite a difference

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- accounting for it incorrectly can introduce more bias than doing nothing
```

## Double censoring: example {.smaller}

We are trying to estimate an incubation period. For person A we know exposure happened on day 1 and symptom onset on day 3.

![](figures/censoring_1.png)

## Double censoring: example {.smaller}

We are trying to estimate an incubation period. For person A we know exposure happened on day 1 and symptom onset on day 3.

![](figures/censoring_2.png)

## Double censoring: example {.smaller}

We are trying to estimate an incubation period. For person A we know exposure happened on day 1 and symptom onset on day 3.

![](figures/censoring_final.png)

## Double censoring: example {.smaller}

We are trying to estimate an incubation period. For person A we know exposure happened on day 1 and symptom onset on day 3.

![](figures/censoring_final.png)

The *true* incubation period of A could be anywhere between 1 and 3 days (but not all equally likely).

## Issue #2: right truncation

- reporting of events can be triggered by the **second** event

> - in that case, longer delays might be missing because they **have not occurred yet**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- in that case, longer delays might be missing because whilst the primary events have occurred the secondary events **have not occurred yet**
```
